# deep-sea-corals
Creating machine learning models to predict what coral type appear in certain localities and depths of the sea

We wanted to know if we can predict what coral type appear in certain areas of the sea using various attributes by utilizing machine learning models. We found data for deep sea corals on Kaggle.com collected by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The dataset included 20 columns, comprised of quantitative and non-quantitative variables, and 513,374 rows of observations.  Some variables included  scientific  name,  vernacular  name  category,  latitude,  longitude,  depth,  and  locality.

We wanted to know if there is a relationship between the coral type and the other attributes in order  to predict the  depth  using various  machine learning  models,  including  logistic regression and decision trees. Our experimental hypothesis was yes, there is a relationship between the coral type and some of  the  other  attributes.   We  initially  believed  there  was  a  relationship  between  type  and  otherv ariables because the amount of available sunlight, organisms available as food, the temperature of the environment, pressure, salinity, and many other attributes can affect which coral species can survive in certain depths of the ocean.


Some of the first marine protected areas were specifically designed around coral reefs, which can be viewed as the "rainforests of the seas". I believe studying deep sea coral is vitally important because there are likely many more deep sea corals still to be found as surveys have typically prioritized corals close to shore. Deep reefs are one of the most under-surveyed ecosystems in the ocean. The full geographic extend of deep sea reeds is still mostly unknown because we have mapped less than 0.05% of the seafloor. Scientists have discovered deep sea corals and sponges anywhere from continental shelves to seamounts to underwater canyons throughout the U.S. marine waters. New animals are still being discovered as we continue to explore the deep ocean.

Although the conditions can be extreme, the deep sea is home to abundant life. These deep sea corals form groves of tree, feather, column, and fan shapes, sometimes reaching tall lengths. Fish, shrimp, crab, and other creatures call these reefs their homes. Deep sea coral, like shallow coral, are colonies of animals that build a common skeleton, which grows into a wide array of shapes and colors. However, unlike shallow reefs, deep reefs can live from 150 feet to 10,000 feet below sea level, where sunlight is dim or nonexistent.

Most deep sea coral are not protected by the laws of any country, so they are among the most vulnerable and potentially overexploited reefs on Earth. Studies have shown that just one-fifth of the known deep sea reefs are protected from bottom fishing and none is protected from various impacts of shipping.

